**Loss of pair formation predates the evolution of male-less society in
*Glyptotermes* termites**

**Nobuaki Mizumoto<sup>1\*</sup>, Simon Hellemans<sup>2</sup>**

1\. Department of Entomology & Plant Pathology, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL, 36849, USA

2\. Okinawa Institute of Science & Technology Graduate University,
Onna-son, Okinawa, 904-0495 Japan

\*: Correspondence: <nzm0095@auburn.edu>

**Abstract**

Parthenogenesis and the loss of males have occurred repeatedly across
diverse organisms. Asexually reproducing lineages are not usually
associated with social animals that exhibit biparental care because such
care is inherently linked to the behavioral sequence of mate pairing and
sexual reproduction. The male-less lineages of the termite,
*Glyptotermes nakajimai*, provide a rare opportunity to study how sexual
reproduction can be lost in social animals with parental care. Here we
demonstrate that modification of the mate-pairing process predated the
evolution of asexual lineages. Termite colonies are typically founded by
a mating pair, with many species forming a tandem courtship pair while
searching for a nest site. Our comparative analysis of tandem running in
*Glyptotermes* termites revealed that two related species, *G. fuscus*
and *G. satsumensis*, exhibited both female-leader and male-leader
tandem runs, estimated to be the ancestral state in this genus. On the
other hand, tandem running was rare and ephemeral in both sexual and
asexual lineages of *G. nakajimai*. These results suggest that *G.
nakajimai* employs an alternative colony foundation strategy, as further
supported by their colony structures. Our study highlights the tight
link between the evolution of asexuality and behavioral preadaptation,
contributing to our understanding of the evolution of complex
phenotypes.

**Keywords:** Asexual reproduction, Movement coordination, Parental
care, Same-sex sexual behavior, Social insects

**Introduction**

Sexual reproduction is the norm for multicellular organisms despite the
costs of producing males \[1,2\]. Many studies have revealed the
advantages of sexual reproduction in short and long periods (e.g.,
\[3\]). Furthermore, in established sexual species, there are genetic
constraints to prevent the evolution of asexuality by maintaining a low
transition rate from sexual to asexual reproduction \[4\]. Therefore,
although asexual lineages evolved across the diversity of taxa, the
evolution of the asexual population is relatively rare. In addition to
genetic mechanisms, specific behaviors of sexual organisms can prevent
the evolution of asexual lineages, such as sexual conflicts \[5\] (but
see \[6\]). Among behavioral traits, the evolution of asexuality is
challenging in social animals with parental care because sexual
reproduction is associated with the sequence of mate pairing and
biparental care, where males contribute to fitness more than sperm
\[1,7\].

Termites evolved from the ancestor of subsocial cockroaches, and
colonies also started from subsocial pairs \[8,9\]. During a season of
the year, alates (winged reproductives) fly to disperse to find a mating
partner \[10\]. After shedding wings, many termite species form tandem
pairing; a female and a male walk together while searching for a nest
site \[11\]. In colony foundation processes, males significantly
contribute to the offspring energetically and through physical labor
\[12,13\]. Also termites require a partner for allogrooming. And thus,
nest establishment as a single termite is not usually successful
\[14,15\]. Therefore, even if several termites have parthenogenetic
ability \[16–18\], they need a partner for colony foundation. A species
of drywood termite, *Glyptotermes nakajimai* Morimoto (Isoptera:
Kalotermitidae) \[19,20\], provides a unique opportunity to study the
evolution of asexual lineages in animals with biparental care. In
several populations, this species completely lost males, and all
colonies are comprised only of females (i.e., all-female asexual
societies) \[21\]. The evolution of this population requires the
modification of a typical monogamous colony foundation in termites.

Two different potential behavioral preadaptations enable the evolution
of a male-less colony foundation in termites. First, colony
establishment by female-female pairs after same-sex tandem runs. For
example, in *Reticulitermes* termites, same-sex tandem runs function as
heterosexual tandem runs \[11,22\], and female-female pairs start their
nests with parthenogenesis \[15,23\], although they are not very
successful in the long term \[24–26\]. If the ancestor of *G. nakajimai*
has strong tandem running behavior with same-sex pairing, they can
achieve the evolution of an asexual population without substantially
changing mate pairing behaviors. Second, pleometrosis (colony foundation
by multiple kings and queens \[27,28\]) can also facilitate the
evolution of an asexual society by securing the number of colony
foundation partners \[29\]. Actually, the colonies of *G. nakajimai* are
often headed by multiple reproductive \[21\]. However, how they achieve
such pleometrosis remains unknown; do they use ancestral tandem running
to form multiple pairs or completely modify the pairing process as
preadaptation?

In this study, we investigated the mate-pairing process of three
different *Glyptotermes* species (*G. nakajimai, G. fuscus, G.
satsumensis*) by confirming their phylogenetic relationship. These three
species can be found sympatrically and relatively related to each other
\[19,30\], but asexual society only arose in *G. nakajimai*. We
especially focused on tandem running behavior by automatically
quantifying it using the deep-leaning automated posture tracking
software \[31\]. We also estimated their phylogenetic relationship using
mitochondrial genomes. By mapping their ecological and colony structure
information on the phylogeny, we reconstruct the behavioral aspects of
the evolution of a male-less society.

**Results and Discussion**

*Observation of tandem pairing behavior*

Tandem running behavior was clearly observed in *G. fuscus* and *G.
satsumensis*, while it was unclear in *G. nakajimai* from both sexual
and asexual populations (Figs. 1 and 2). First, these species showed
distinct patterns in pair positioning when we observed behavioral
interactions of mating pairs (or female-female pair in asexual
populations) in a pest dish arena. When we pooled the datasets, pairs
are found often within two body length distances across all species,
where data distribution seemed to follow different patterns within or
beyond two body length (Fig. 1AC). Thus, termites should have been in
interaction when they were within two body length. Second, when termites
are within two body length, spatial orientations of pairs were
different. In *G. satsumensis*, pairs often positioned in a single file,
where females were located either behind or in front of the males, and
vice versa (Fig. 1AB). In *G. fuscus*, similarly, positioned in a single
file, but females were often positioned behind males (Fig. 1AC). In
contrast, we could not observe the clear following positioning in *G.
nakajimai* in either sexual or asexual populations (Fig. 1AB). We used
these observations for defining tandem runs; partners were in
interaction when the distance was within two body lengths, and while
interactions, pairs were in tandem run when female was in front of male,
and male was behind female (and vice versa).

Next, we further looked into pair interactions for each pair in detail.
Tandem running behavior was highly variable across different pairs (Fig.
2A), even with the same species, some showed tandem runs during entire
observations, while some did not show tandem run at all. However, long
tandem running (e.g., more than 40% of the observational time) was only
observed in *G. satsumensis* (x/x) and *G. fuscus*, not in *G.
nakajimai*. There was no significant difference in the proportion of the
time for tandem running behavior among species (GLMM, χ23 = 3.74, P =
0.291). Within each species, there were differences in the proportion of
time spent in tandem runs, where female-led tandem run was more common
than male-led in G. satsumensis (GLMM, χ21 = 22.92, P \< 0.001), while
male-led tandem runnings were more common than female-led tandem
runnings in G. fuscus (χ21 = 26118, P \< 0.001) or G. nakajimai (χ21 =
497.38, P \< 0.001). Thus, male is more active sex for pairing in *G.
satsumensis*, while female is more active sex for pairing in *G. fuscus*
and *G. nakajimai*.

Because the function of tandem running behavior is to maintain pair
cohesion while exploring the environments, tandem running behavior
should be evaluated as distance a pair moved during a continuous
interacting event, rather than the duration they spent in the posture of
following the other. When we compared the traveled distance, we found
that *G. satsumensis* and *G. fuscus* traveled longer distance than *G.
nakajimai* (Fig. 2; Cox mixed effect model, male leader, χ23 = 30.19, P
\< 0.001, female leader, χ23 = 17.56, P \< 0.001). In this sense,
although G. nakajimai showed ephemeral tandem runs, their functionality
is questioned; even the longest tandem run broke up after moving xx mm.
Given that these species starts their nest at the tree branches, they
cannot explore among options while pair maintenance. On the other hand,
tandem running of *G. satsumensis* and *G. fuscus* can travel for more
than 1m long in 24 events continuously (15: *G. fuscus*, 9: *G.
satsumensis*, from 16 pairs, 11: *G. fuscus*, 5: *G. satsumensis*). This
allows them to explore the tree branches thoroughly. Within these
species, there was no significant functional differences between female
led and male led tandem runs (Cox mixed effect model , G. fuscus; χ21 =
2.41, P = 0.121, G. satsumensis; χ21 = 0.14, P = 0.704).

![](media/image1.png)

> **Figure 1.** Spatial positioning between partners in *Glyptotermes*
> termites. (A) Comparison of the relative position of the partner,
> given that female (left) or male (right) heading towards the top at
> the center. Simplified phylogenetic relationship based on \[21\] is
> also provided. (B) Distributions of the partner's position relative to
> the female's heading direction in angles when the pair is within 2
> body lengths. (C) Distributions of the distance between partners.

![](media/image2.png)

> **Figure 2.** Tandem running behavior of each species. (A) Proportion
> of time in each state during observation. Each bar represents one
> pair. (B-C) Interspecific comparison of the traveled distance during
> each tandem running event.

*Ancestral state of tandem running behavior*

Previous studies on genus level ancestral state reconstruction and
fossil record suggested that the ancestor of Kalotermitidae exhibited
tandem running behavior \[11,32\]. At the same time, tandem running is
highly variable within Kalotermitidae, where some showed tandem running,
but some do not even within the same genus \[11\]. To reconstruct the
evolutionary process of tandem running, we performed the species level
ancestral state reconstruction, using the mitochondrial genome phylogeny
and published datasets.

We estimated that the ancestor of Glyptotermes tandem running as
follows:

Both leader -\> active role of female in pairing -\> loss of tandem
running -\>loss of males

Sexually active males prevent the evolution of asexuality

*Colony structure*

In *G. nakajimai*, colonies often include many alate-derived
reproductives in both sexual and asexual populations \[21\]. Also, in
asexual populations, colony foundation by multiple queens has been
observed, while no data is available in sexual populations \[21\]. Such
pleometrosis (colony foundation by reproductives more than a pair)
should have contributed to removing a barrier to the evolution of
asexuality as they can achieve alloparental care without males. Among
termite species, pleometrosis has been observed in several species of
Termitidae \[27,33\]. However, in Kalotermitidae, colonies are commonly
headed by a monogamous reproductive pair (e.g., \[34,35\]). Thus, we
checked the colony structure of *G. satsumensis* and *G. fuscus* to
further investigate the origin of pleometrosis as a preadaptation of
asexuality.

Although our records are limited, mature colonies of *G. fuscus* and *G.
satsumensis* often included multiple reproductives (Table X), with no
significant differences in the number of reproductives between G. fuscus
and G. nakajimai (stat, we did not include *G. satsumensis* due to
limited sample size). However, the source of such multiple reproductives
in mature colonies could have been different from *G. nakajimai* and the
other two species. A previous study showed that incipient colonies of
*G. nakajimai* already had multiple queens \[21\] (pair: 1/4), while
incipient colonies of *G. fuscus* or *G. satsumensis* were monogamous
pairs. (pair: 4/4). If they start a colony from a monogamous pair,
colony fusion could be a mechanism of multiple reproductives in mature
nests, although colony fusion often causes competition between
reproductives and results in monogamous pairs in many other species
(refs). In this sense, *Glyptotermes* termites might be tolerant to the
presence of other reproductive, which may have played a role in
facilitating the evolution of pleometrosis in this group.

We detected the correlation between pair formation behavior and colony
foundation unit in the studied species; *G. fuscus* and *G. satsumensis*
exhibited tandem running and monogamous colony foundation (Fig. Table),
while *G. nakajimai* lacked tandem runs and strict monogamous pairing
(Fig.). However, it remains unclear if tandem pair formation necessarily
leads to monogamous pairing. For example, although some other
Kalotermitidae species (e.g., *Neotermes sugioi* and *Pterotermes*) lack
tandem running behavior \[36,37\], these showed more strict monogamous
pairing \[34,35\]. On the other hand, *Odontotermes* or *Macrotermes*
termites show tandem running (summarized in \[11\]), but they show
pleometrosis relatively frequently \[27\]. Instead, resource
availability should facilitate pleometrosis \[29\]. When the nesting
site is a limited and valuable resource, termite dealates must
concentrate and be forced to start a colony with many individuals.
Actually, the distribution of *G. nakajimai* is highly localized within
a specific area compared to the other two species. Pleometrosis observed
in *G. nakajimai* may have been due to their particular requirements as
a site of colony foundation,

***Conclusion***

Parthenogenesis ability has evolved independently many times in
termites, but asexual society only happens in *G. nakajimai* as far as
we know. We attributed this rarity to the complex combination of
required preadaptations. For example, *Reticulitermes* termites and
several other termites incorporate facultative parthenogenesis into
their colony reproductive system and life history \[38,39\]. Also, these
species show female-female pairing and colony foundation \[40\],
although female-female pairs do not result in functional colonies in a
long timeline \[24,25\]. These species ultimately use strict social
monogamy, where the presence of multiple kings or queens leads to
competition and a monogamous pair. Also, male is the active sex of
tandem pairing, which might hinder the evolution of asexuality.
Similarly, *Neotermes sugioi* shows facultative parthenogenesis and even
lacks tandem running behavior. However, this species also shows strict
monogamous pairing.

Sexual reproduction is the norm in animal kingdoms, and the evolution of
asexuality does not happen randomly across lineages because each group
has a specific unique hurdle to overcome during male loss. Many
theoretical studies of the evolution of sexuality have acknowledged that
parental care by males can minimize the cost of sexual reproduction.
Thus, evolutionary change of behavior should accompany such species. In
this study, we showed that mate pairing behavior went through several
steps of preadaptations in the course of the evolutionary loss of males
in a termite, *G. nakajimai*. This highlights the importance of
behavioral preadaptation as a prerequisite for the evolution of
sexuality in social animals. By focusing on the behavioral aspects of
sexual and asexual evolution, our results shed light on the integrative
approach to the evolution of the sex.

**Methods**

*Termite collection*

We collected all termite colonies with a piece of nesting wood from the
field. We collected three colonies of *G. fuscus* (one in January 2021
and one in March 2022 in Nago, Okinawa; one in March 2023, Iriomote Is.,
Okinawa), three colonies of *G. satsumensis* in March 2021 (two in
Minamiosumi, Kagoshima, one in Kushima, Miyazaki), and four colonies of
*G. nakajimai* (two in March 2021, Wakasa, Fukui, one in April 2023,
Tokunoshima Is. Kagoshima, one in March 2021 in Cape Toi, Miyazaki). For
*G. nakajimai*, samples from Fukui and Tokunoshima Is. were sexual
\[41\], while the sample from Cape Toi was asexual \[21\]. The field
collection was performed before the swarming seasion; each colony
contained nymphs but not alates. All colonies were maintained within the
nesting wood at 22°C until the experiments. Before each experiment, we
transferred nests to a room at 27 °C, which promoted alates to emerge
and fly. We also opened the nest with axes and collected alates fly out
of the nests. We induced alates to shed their wings by manually pinching
their wings with forceps, maintained in petri dishes containing moist,
unwoven cloth in the light and used for the experiments within 1 day of
flight. Dealates were separated by sex, and color-marked with one dot of
paint (PX-20; Mitsubishi) on the abdomen to distinguish sex identities.

*Behavioral observations*

We introduced a female-male pair of termite dealates (female-female pair
for asexual population of *G. nakajimai*) to the experimental arena,
consisting of a petri dish (φ = 90 mm) covered with a layer of moistened
plaster. All pairs were prepared using nest mates. We recorded their
behavior up to 60 minutes at the rate of 30 frames per second. All the
videos were cropped to 1200x1200 pix to only include the arena in the
frame before the video analysis. In total, we observed 21 pairs of *G.
stsumensis* (340:16, 347:2, JP21-06:3), 46 pairs of *G. fuscus* (21A:16,
G05:18, NM2325:12), 25 pairs of *G. nakajimai* sexual populations
(356:6, 367:3, NM2344:16), and 15 pairs of asexual populations.

All videos were analyzed using SLEAP v 1.4.0 \[31\] to estimate the
movement of body parts of each individual. We used a 6-node skeleton:
antenna tips (LR), head (middle of mouth parts), head-pronotum boundary,
body center, abdomen-tip, and a dot of color painted marker. We built a
model for one species and then used it as a starting point to build
another for the next species sequentially. First, we labeled 342
individuals from 23 videos for training in *G. satsumensis*. We trained
a U-Net-based model with a multi-animal top-down approach, with a
receptive field size of 76 pixels for the centroid and 156 pixels for
the centered instance, on Nvidia GeForce RTX 4090, where augmentation is
done by rotating images from -180 to 180 degrees. The mean Average
Precision (mAP) and mean Average Recall (mAR) of this model were 0.36
and 0.49, respectively. While tracking after the inference, we used the
instance similarity method with the greedy matching method. All pose
estimation data were converted to HDF5 files for further analysis. In
*G. fuscus*, TBA.

We used Python to format all HDF5 files for further analysis and
converted them into FEATHER files for analysis in R \[42\]. We employed
a linear interpolation method to address missing values in the dataset.
After scaling all data from pixels to mm (1200 pixels = arena size), we
used a median filter with a kernel size of 5 to reduce noise.

To compare tandem running behaviors among species, we automatically
determined that pairs were in tandem or not based on the postures and
spatial position of partners. First, we regarded two individuals were in
interaction when the distance between body centers of partners was less
than two body lengthes, based on the frequency distribution of this
distance (Fig. 1C). In this process, we ignored the short interaction
events or non-interaction events less than 2 seconds to smooth the data.
Second, during interactions, we classified termite heading orientation
as female-leader and male-leader. We obtained heading directions of
females and males as vector from abdomen tips to head front. Then a pair
was in female-leader when male was behind relative to female heading
direction, and female was front relative to male heading direction, and
vice versa (Fig. 1AB). If a pair spent in female-leader position for
more than half of the time during an interaction event, we regarded that
the interaction event was female-leader tandem runs. This classified all
frames into female-leader tandem, male-leader tandem, other interactions
(including tandem runs where they switch leader-follower roles), and
non-interactions. We obtrained the traveled distance for which the
leader walked during each tandem running events. Then we compared this
traveled distance, using mixed-effects Cox models, with species being
treated as a fixed effect and each pair id as a random effect. We used
coxme() function in the coxme package in R \[43\]. Note that we used
distance instead of duration to evaluate how much tandem running pair
could explore the envronments by removing pausing time during
interactions.

*Ancestral state reconstruction*

How we obtained the phylogeny is here.

**Acknowledgments**

We thank Kensei Kikuchi and Esra Kaymak for field collection, Aoi
Mizumoto for assist in video recording, and members in Mizumoto lab for
helpful discussion. The work was supported by a JSPS Research Fellowship
for Young Scientists CPD to NM (20J00660), a Grant-in-Aid for
Early-Career Scientists (21K15168) to NM.

HATCH project number.

**References**

1\. Smith JM. 1978 *The Evolution of Sex*. CUP Archive. 2. Lehtonen J,
Jennions MD, Kokko H. 2012 The many costs of sex. *Trends in Ecology &
Evolution* **27**, 172–178. (doi:10.1016/j.tree.2011.09.016)3. West,
Lively, Read. 1999 A pluralist approach to sex and recombination.
*Journal of Evolutionary Biology* **12**, 1003–1012.
(doi:10.1046/j.1420-9101.1999.00119.x)4. Engelstädter J. 2008
Constraints on the evolution of asexual reproduction. *BioEssays*
**30**, 1138–1150. (doi:10.1002/bies.20833)5. Kawatsu K. 2013 Sexually
Antagonistic Coevolution for Sexual Harassment Can Act as a Barrier to
Further Invasions by Parthenogenesis. *The American Naturalist* **181**,
223–234. (doi:10.1086/668832)6. Burke NW, Crean AJ, Bonduriansky R. 2015
The role of sexual conflict in the evolution of facultative
parthenogenesis: a study on the spiny leaf stick insect. *Animal
Behaviour* **101**, 117–127. (doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2014.12.017)7.
Michiels, Beukeboom, Greeff, Pemberton. 1999 Individual control over
reproduction: an underestimated element in the maintenance of sex?
*Journal of Evolutionary Biology* **12**, 1036–1039.
(doi:10.1046/j.1420-9101.1999.00120.x)8. Bell WJ, Roth LM, Nalepa CA.
2007 *Cockroaches Ecology, Behavior and Natural History*. JHU Press. 9.
Chouvenc T. 2022 Eusociality and the transition from biparental to
alloparental care in termites. *Functional Ecology* **36**, 3049–3059.
(doi:10.1111/1365-2435.14183)10. Nutting WL. 1969 Flight and colony
foundation. In *Biology of termites* (eds K Krishna, FM Weesner), pp.
233–282. New York: Academic Press.
(doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-395529-6.50012-X)11. Mizumoto N, Bourguignon T,
Bailey NW. 2022 Ancestral sex-role plasticity facilitates the evolution
of same-sex sexual behavior. *Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America* **119**, e2212401119.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.2212401119)12. Chouvenc T. 2019 The relative
importance of queen and king initial weights in termite colony
foundation success. *Insectes Sociaux* **66**, 177–184.
(doi:10.1007/s00040-019-00690-3)13. Inagaki T, Yanagihara S, Fuchikawa
T, Matsuura K. 2020 Gut microbial pulse provides nutrition for parental
provisioning in incipient termite colonies. *Behav Ecol Sociobiol*
**74**, 64. (doi:10.1007/s00265-020-02843-y)14. Mizumoto N, Yashiro T,
Matsuura K. 2016 Male same-sex pairing as an adaptive strategy for
future reproduction in termites. *Animal Behaviour* **119**, 179–187.
(doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2016.07.007)15. Matsuura K, Fujimoto M, Goka K.
2004 Sexual and asexual colony foundation and the mechanism of
facultative parthenogenesis in the termite *Reticulitermes speratus*
(Isoptera, Rhinotermitidae). *Insectes Sociaux* **51**, 325–332.
(doi:10.1007/s00040-004-0746-0)16. Hellemans S, Dolejšová K, Křivánek J,
Fournier D, Hanus R, Roisin Y. 2019 Widespread occurrence of asexual
reproduction in higher termites of the Termes group (Termitidae:
Termitinae). *BMC Evolutionary Biology* **19**, 131.
(doi:10.1186/s12862-019-1459-3)17. Yashiro T. 2024 Evolution of obligate
asexuality in termites with mixed-sex societies. *Population Ecology*
**66**, 219–231. (doi:10.1002/1438-390X.12195)18. Matsuura K. 2010
Sexual and Asexual Reproduction in Termites. In *Biology of Termites: a
Modern Synthesis*, pp. 255–277. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
(doi:10.1007/978-90-481-3977-4\_10)19. Takematsu Y, Yamaoka R. 1997
Taxonomy of *Glyptotermes* (Isoptera, Kalotermitidae) in Japan with
reference to cuticular hydrocarbon analysis as chemotaxonomic
characters. *Esakia* **37**, 1–14.20. Morimoto K. 1973 *Glyptotermes
nakajimai*, a new termite from Japan (Isoptera: Kalotermitidae).
*Kontyu* **41**, 470–474.21. Yashiro T, Lo N, Kobayashi K, Nozaki T,
Fuchikawa T, Mizumoto N, Namba Y, Matsuura K. 2018 Loss of males from
mixed-sex societies in termites. *BMC Biology* **16**, 96.
(doi:10.1186/s12915-018-0563-y)22. Matsuura K, Kuno E, Nishida T. 2002
Homosexual Tandem Running as Selfish Herd in *Reticulitermes speratus*:
Novel Antipredatory Behavior in Termites. *Journal of Theoretical
Biology* **214**, 63–70. (doi:10.1006/jtbi.2001.2447)23. Tamaki C,
Takata M, Matsuura K. 2021 The lose-to-win strategy of the weak:
intraspecific parasitism via egg abduction in a termite. *Biol. Lett.*
**17**, 20210540. (doi:10.1098/rsbl.2021.0540)24. Morooka F, Maekawa K,
Kitade O. 2025 Intraspecific variation of sex ratio and body size along
latitude in the termite Reticulitermes speratus (Isoptera:
Heterotermitidae). *Insect. Soc.* (doi:10.1007/s00040-024-01017-7)25.
Matsuura K, Mizumoto N, Kobayashi K, Nozaki T, Fujita T, Yashiro T,
Fuchikawa T, Mitaka Y, Vargo EL. 2018 A genomic imprinting model of
termite caste determination: Not genetic but epigenetic inheritance
influences offspring caste fate. *American Naturalist* **191**, 677–690.
(doi:10.1086/697238)26. Wu Y, Fujita T, Namba Y, Kobayashi K, Takata M,
Vargo EL, Matsuura K. 2024 Inter-clonal competition over queen
succession imposes a cost of parthenogenesis on termite colonies.
*Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences* **291**,
20232711. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2023.2711)27. Chiu C-I, Neoh K-B, Li H-F.
2018 Colony-founding success of pleometrosis in a fungus-growing termite
Odontotermes formosanus. *Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology* **72**,
13. (doi:10.1007/s00265-017-2429-7)28. Hartke TR, Rosengaus RB. 2013
Costs of pleometrosis in a polygamous termite. *Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London B* **280**, 20122563. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2012.2563)29.
Timmermans J, Hellemans S, Křivánek J, Kaymak E, Fontaine N, Bourguignon
T, Hanus R, Roisin Y. 2024 How inquilinism shaped breeding systems in a
termite host-inquiline relationship. *Molecular Ecology* **33**, e17494.
(doi:10.1111/mec.17494)30. Ikehara S. 1966 Distribution of termites in
the Ryukyu Archipelago. *Bulletin of Arts and Science Division
University of the Ryukyus Mathematics and Natural Science* **9**,
49–178.31. Pereira TD *et al.* 2022 SLEAP: A deep learning system for
multi-animal pose tracking. *Nature Methods* **19**, 486–495.
(doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01426-1)32. Mizumoto N, Hellemans S, Engel MS,
Bourguignon T, Buček A. 2024 Extinct and extant termites reveal the
fidelity of behavior fossilization in amber. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A.* **121**, e2308922121. (doi:10.1073/pnas.2308922121)33. Thorne
BL. 1984 Polygyny in the Neotropical termite Nasutitermes corniger: life
history consequences of queen mutualism. *Behav Ecol Sociobiol* **14**,
117–136. (doi:10.1007/BF00291903)34. Sugio K, Miyaguni Y, Yoshimura T.
2020 Colony structure and caste distribution in living trees of the
Ryukyu drywood termite, Neotermes sugioi (Blattodea: Kalotermitidae) in
Okinawa Island. *Journal of Asia-Pacific Entomology* **23**, 853–862.
(doi:10.1016/j.aspen.2020.07.013)35. Nutting WL. 1970 Composition and
Size of Some Termite Colonies in Arizona and Mexico. *Annals of the
Entomological Society of America* **63**, 1105–1110.
(doi:10.1093/aesa/63.4.1105)36. Sugio K, Miyaguni Y, Tayasu I. 2018
Characteristics of dispersal flight and disperser production in an Asian
dry-wood termite, *Neotermes koshunensis* (Isoptera, Kalotermitidae).
*Insectes Sociaux* **65**, 323–330. (doi:10.1007/s00040-018-0616-9)37.
Carr RV. 1972 The tergal grand and coutship behavior in the termites
*Pterotermes occidentis*, *Marginitermes hubbardi* and *Paraneotermes
simplicicornis* (Isoptera: Kalotermitidae). The university of
Arizona.38. Matsuura K, Vargo EL, Kawatsu K, Labadie PE, Nakano H,
Yashiro T, Tsuji K. 2009 Queen succession through asexual reproduction
in termites. *Science* **323**, 1687. (doi:10.1126/science.1169702)39.
Hellemans S, Roisin Y. 2020 Asexual Queen Succession in Termites. In
*eLS* (ed John Wiley & Sons, Ltd), pp. 13–20. Wiley.
(doi:10.1002/9780470015902.a0029115)40. Matsuura K, Nishida T. 2001
Comparison of colony foundation success between sexual pairs and female
asexual units in the termite *Reticulitermes speratus* (Isoptera:
Rhinotermitidae). *Population Ecology* **43**, 119–124.
(doi:10.1007/PL00012022)41. Nishiharu S, Sasaji H. 1994 Discovery of
*Glyptotermes nakajimai* Morimoto (Isoptera) from Is. Aoshima, Fukui
Pref., off the coast of the Japan Sea. *Entomological Journal of Fukui*
**15**, 61–62.42. R Core Team. 2023 R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. 43. Therneau TM. 2015 coxme: mixed effects Cox
models.
